XV. Winter Animals.
When the ponds were firmly frozen they afforded not only new and shorter routes to many points,
but new views from their surfaces of the familiar landscape around them. When I crossed Flint's
Pond after it was covered with snow, though I had often paddled about and skated over it,
it was so unexpectedly wide and so strange that I could think of nothing but Baffin's Bay. The
Lincoln Hills rose up around me at the extremity of a snowy plain, in which I did not remember
to have stood before, and the fishermen, at an indeterminable distance over the ice, moving
slowly about with their wolfish dogs, passed for sealers or Eskimo, or in misty weather
loomed like fabulous creatures, and I did not know whether they were giants or pygmies.
I took this course when I went to lecture in Lincoln in the evening, travelling in no road
and passing no house between my own hut and the lecture-room. In Goose Pond, which lay in my way,
a colony of muskrats dwelt and raised their cabins high above the ice, though none could be seen
abroad when I crossed it. Walden, being like the rest usually bare of snow, or with only shallow
and interrupted drifts on it, was my yard where I could walk freely when the snow was nearly two
feet deep on a level elsewhere and the villagers were confined to their streets. There, far from
the village street, and except at very long intervals from the jingle of sleigh bells,
I slid and skated, as in a vast moose-yard well trodden, overhung by oak woods and solemn pines
bent down with snow or bristling with icicles. For sounds in winter nights, and often in winter days,
I heard the forlorn but melodious note of a hooting owl indefinitely far, such a sound as
the frozen earth would yield if struck with a suitable plectrum, the very lingua vernacular
of Walden wood, and quite familiar to me at last, though I never saw the bird while it was making it.
I seldom opened my door in a winter evening without hearing it.
Hoo, hoo, hoo, hooter, hoo,
sounded sonorously, and the first three syllables accented somewhat like how dare do,
or sometimes hoo, hoo, only. One night, in the beginning of winter, before the pond froze over,
about nine o'clock, I was startled by the loud honking of a goose, and stepped to the door,
heard the sound of their wings like a tempest in the woods as they flew low over my house.
They passed over the pond toward Fairhaven, seemingly deterred from settling by my light,
their Commodore honking all the while with a regular beat.
Suddenly an unmistakable cat-owl, from very near me, with the most harsh and tremendous voice I
ever heard from any inhabitant of the woods, responded at regular intervals to the goose,
as if determined to expose and disgrace this intruder from Hudson's Bay, by exhibiting a
horizon.
What do you mean by alarming the citadel at this time of night consecrated to me?
Do you think I am ever caught napping at such an hour,
and that I have not got lungs and a larynx as well as yourself?
It was one of the most thrilling discords I ever heard.
And yet, if you had a discriminating ear, there were in it the elements of a Concord such as these
planes never saw nor heard. I also heard the whooping of the ice in the pond, my great bedfellow
in that part of Concord, as if it were restless in its bed and would fain turn over, were troubled
with flatulency, and had dreams, or I was waked by the cracking of the ground by the frost,
as if someone had driven a team against my door, and in the morning would find a crack in the earth
a quarter of a mile long and a third of an inch wide. Sometimes I heard the foxes as they ranged
over the snow crust in moonlight nights, in search of a partridge or other game,
barking raggedly and demoniacly like forest dogs, as if laboring with some anxiety,
or seeking expression, struggling for light, and to be dogs outright and run freely in the streets.
For if we take the ages into our account, may there not be a civilization going on among brutes,
as well as men? They seemed to me to be rudimental burrowing men,
still standing on their defense, awaiting their transformation.
Sometimes one came near to my window, attracted by my light, barked a vulpine curse at me,
and then retreated, usually the red squirrel.
Sirius Hudsonius waked me in the dawn, coursing over the roof and up and down the sides of the
house, as if sent out of the woods for this purpose. In the course of the winter I threw out
half a bushel of ears of sweet corn which had not got ripe, on to the snow crust by my door,
and was amused by watching the motions of the various animals which were baited by it.
In the twilight and the night the rabbits came regularly and made a hearty meal. All day long
the red squirrels came and went, and afforded me much entertainment by their maneuvers.
One would approach, at first warily, through the shrub oaks, running over the snow crust by
and starts like a leaf blown by the wind, now a few paces this way, with wonderful speed and
waste of energy, making inconceivable haste with his trotters, as if it were for a wager,
and now as many paces that way, but never getting on more than half a rod at a time,
and then suddenly pausing with a ludicrous expression and a gratuitous somerset, as if all
the eyes in the universe were eyed on him. For all the motions of a squirrel, even in the most
solitary recesses of the forest, imply spectators as much as those of a dancing girl, wasting more
time and delay and circumspection than would have sufficed to walk the whole distance.
I never saw one walk, and then suddenly, before you could say Jack Robinson,
he would be in the top of a young pitch pine winding up his clock and chiding all imaginary
spectators, soliloquizing and talking to all the universe at the same time, for no reason that I
could ever detect, or he himself was aware of, I suspect. At length he would reach the corn,
and selecting a suitable ear, frisk about in the same uncertain trigonometrical way,
to the tuckmost stick of my wood-pile before my window, where he looked me in the face,
and there sit for hours. Supplying himself with a new ear from time to time,
nibbling at first voraciously and throwing the half-naked cobs about, till at length he grew
more dainty still and played with his food, tasting only the inside of the kernel and the ear,
which was held balanced over the stick by one paw, slipping from his careless grasp,
and fell to the ground, when he would look over at it with a ludicrous expression of uncertainty,
as if suspecting that it had life, with a mind not made up whether to get it again, or a new one,
or be off, now thinking of corn, then listening to hear what was in the wind.
So the little impudent fellow would waste many an ear in a forenoon, till at last,
seizing some longer and plumper one, considerably bigger than himself, and skillfully balancing it,
he would set out with it to the woods, like a tiger with a buffalo, by the same zigzag
course and frequent pauses, scratching along with it as if it were too heavy for him, and
all the while making its fall a diagonal between a perpendicular and horizontal,
being determined to put it through at any rate. A singularly frivolous and whimsical fellow,
and so he would get off with it to where he lived, perhaps carry it to the top of a pine
tree forty or fifty rods distant, and I would afterwards find the cobs strewn about the woods
in various directions. At length the jays arrive, whose discordant screams were heard long before,
as they were warily making their approach an eighth of a mile off, and in a stealthy and
sneaking manner they flit from tree to tree, nearer and nearer, and pick up the kernels which the
dropped. Then, sitting on a pitch pine bough, they attempt to swallow in their haste a kernel
which is too big for their throats and chokes them, and after great labor they disgorge it,
and spend an hour in the endeavor to crack it by repeated blows with their bills.
They were manifestly thieves, and I had not much respect for them, but the squirrels,
though at first shy, went to work as if they were taking what was their own.
Meanwhile also came the chickadees in flocks, which, picking up the crumbs the squirrels had
dropped, flew to the nearest twig, and placing them under their claws, hammered away at them
with their little bills, as if it were an insect in the bark, till they were sufficiently reduced
for their slender throats. A little flock of these tit-mice came daily to pick a dinner out
of my wood-pile, or the crumbs at my door, with faint flitting, lisping notes, like the tinkling
of icicles in the grass, or else with sprightly, day, day, day, or more rarely in spring-like days,
a wiry, summery Phoebe from the wood-side. They were so familiar that, at length,
one alighted on an armful of wood which I was carrying in and pecked at the sticks without fear.
I once had a sparrow alight upon my shoulder for a moment while I was hoeing in a village garden,
and I felt that I was more distinguished by that circumstance than I should have been
by any epaulette I could have worn. The squirrels also grew at last to be quite familiar,
and occasionally stepped upon my shoe, when that was the nearest way. When the ground was
not yet quite covered, and again, near the end of winter, when the snow was melted on my south
hill-side and about my wood-pile, the partridges came out of the woods morning and evening to feed
there. Whichever side you walk in the woods the partridge bursts away on whirring wings,
jarring the snow from the dry leaves and twigs on high, which comes sifting down in the sun-beams
like golden dust, for this brave bird is not to be scared by winter. It is frequently covered up
by drifts, and, it is said, sometimes plunges from on wing into the soft snow where it remains
concealed for a day or two. I used to start them in the open land also, where they had come out
of the woods at sunset to bud the wild apple trees. They will come regularly every evening
to particular trees, where the cunning sportsman lies and wait for them, and the distant orchards
next to the woods suffer thus not a little. I am glad that the partridge gets fed at any rate.
It is nature's own bird which lives on buds and diet drink.
In dark winter mornings, or in short winter afternoons, I sometimes heard a pack of hounds
threading all the woods with hounding cry and yelp, unable to resist the instinct of the chase,
and the note of the hunting-horn at intervals, proving that man was in the rear.
The woods ring again, and yet no fox bursts forth on to the open level of the pond,
nor following pack pursuing their actaeon, and perhaps at evening I see the hunters returning
with a single brush trailing from their sleigh for a trophy, seeking their inn.
They tell me that if the fox would remain in the bosom of the frozen earth he would be safe,
or if B would run in a straight line away no fox-hound could overtake him,
but having left his pursuers far behind he stops to rest and listen till they come up,
and when he runs he circles round to his old haunts where the hunters await him.
Sometimes, however, he will run upon a wall many rods, and then leap off far to one side,
and he appears to know that water will not retain his scent. A hunter told me that he once saw a
fox pursued by hounds burst out on to Walden when the ice was covered with shallow puddles,
run part way across, and then return to the same shore.
Ere long the hounds arrived, but here they lost the scent. Sometimes a pack hunting by themselves
would pass my door, and circle round my house and yelp and hound without regarding me, as if
afflicted by a species of madness, so that nothing could divert them from the pursuit.
Thus they circle until they fall upon the recent trail of a fox, for a wise hound will
forsake everything else for this. One day a man came to my hut from Lexington to inquire after his
hound, that made a large track, and had been hunting for a week by himself, but I fear that
he was not the wiser for all I told him, for every time I attempted to answer his questions
he interrupted me by asking, What do you do here? He had lost a dog, but found a man.
One old hunter, who has a dry tongue, who used to come to bathe in Walden once every year when the
water was warmest, and at such times looked in upon me, told me that many years ago he took his
gun one afternoon and went out for a cruise in Walden Wood, and as he walked the Wayland road he
heard the cry of hounds approaching, and ere long a fox leaped the wall into the road, and as quick
as thought leaped the other wall out of the road, and his swift bullet had not touched him.
Some way behind came an old hound and her three pups in full pursuit, hunting on their own accord,
and disappeared again in the woods. Late in the afternoon, as he was resting in the thick woods
south of Walden, he heard the voice of the hounds far over toward Fair Haven still pursuing the fox,
and on they came, their hounding cry which made all the woods ring, sounding nearer and nearer,
now from Well Meadow, now from the Baker Farm. For a long time he stood still and listened to
their music, so sweet to a hunter's ear, when suddenly the fox appeared, threading the solemn
aisles with an easy coursing pace, whose sound was concealed by a sympathetic rustle of the leaves,
swift and still, keeping the round, leaving his pursuers far behind,
and leaping upon a rock amid the woods he sat erect and listening, with his back to the hunter.
For a moment compassion restrained the latter's arm, but that was a short-lived mood.
And as quick as thought can follow thought his peace was levelled and whang!
The fox, rolling over the rock, lay dead on the ground. The hunter still kept his place and
listened to the hounds. Still on they came, and now the near woods resounded through all their aisles
with their demoniac cry. At length the old hound burst into view with muzzle to the ground,
and snapping the air as if possessed, and ran directly to the rock. But spying the dead fox
she suddenly ceased her hounding as if struck dumb with amazement, and walked round and round
him in silence. And one by one her pups arrived, and like their mother were sobered into silence
by the mystery. Then the hunter came forward and stood in their midst, and the mystery was solved.
They waited in silence while he skinned the fox, then followed the brush a while, and at length
turned off into the woods again. That evening a Weston squire came to the Concord hunter's
cottage to inquire for his hounds, and told how for a week they had been hunting on their own
from Weston woods. The Concord hunter told him what he knew and offered him the skin,
but the other declined it and departed. He did not find his hounds that night, but the next day
learned that they had crossed the river and put up at a farmhouse for the night.
Whence, having been well fed, they took their departure early in the morning.
The hunter who told me this could remember one Sam Nutting, who used to hunt bears on Fairhaven
ledges, and exchanged their skins for rum in Concord village, who told him even that he had
seen a moose there. Nutting had a famous fox-hound named Burgoyne. He pronounced it Bugene, which my
informant used to borrow. In the vast book of an old trader of this town, who was also a captain,
town clerk, and representative, I find the following entry. January 18, 1742, 43. John Melvin,
credited by one, Gray Fox, zero, two, three. They are not now found here, and in his ledger,
February 7, 1743, Hezekiah Stratton has credit by one half a cat-skin, zero, one, four plus.
Of course a wild cat, for Stratton was a sergeant in the old French war, and would not have got
for hunting less noble game. Credit is given for deer skins also, and they were daily sold.
One man still preserves the horns of the last deer that was killed in this vicinity,
and another has told me the particulars of the hunt in which his uncle was engaged.
The hunters were formerly a numerous and merry crew here. I remember well one Gaunt Nimrod,
who would catch up a leaf by the roadside and play a strain on it,
wilder and more melodious, if my memory serves me, than any hunting-horn.
At midnight, when there was a moon, I sometimes met with hounds in my path prowling about the woods,
which would skulk out of my way, as if afraid, and stand silent amid the bushes till I had passed.
Squirrels and wild mice disputed for my store of nuts. There were scores of pitch pines around
my house, from one to four inches in diameter, which had been gnawed by mice the previous winter,
a Norwegian winter for them, for the snow lay long and deep, and they were obliged to
mix a large proportion of pine bark with their other diet. These trees were alive and apparently
flourishing at midsummer, and many of them had grown afoot, though completely girdled,
but after another winter such were without exception dead. It is remarkable that a single
mouse should thus be allowed a whole pine tree for its dinner, gnawing round instead of up and
down it, but perhaps it is necessary in order to thin these trees, which are wont to grow up densely.
The hares, Lepus Americanus, were very familiar. One had her form under my house all winter,
separated from me only by the flooring, and she startled me each morning by her hasty departure
when I began to stir, thump, thump, thump, striking her head against the floor timbers in her hurry.
They used to come round my door at dusk to nibble the potato pairings which I had thrown out,
and were so nearly the color of the ground that they could hardly be distinguished when still.
Sometimes in the twilight I alternately lost and recovered sight of one sitting motionless under
my window. When I opened my door in the evening off they would go with a squeak and a bounce.
Near at hand they only excited my pity. One evening one sat by my door two paces from me,
at first trembling with fear, yet unwilling to move. A poor wee thing, lean and bony,
with ragged ears and sharp nose, scant tail and slender paws. It looked as if nature no
longer contained the breed of nobler bloods, but stood on her last toes. Its large eyes appeared
young and unhealthy, almost dropsicle. I took a step and low away its scud with an elastic spring
over the snow crust, straightening its body and its limbs into graceful length,
and soon put the forest between me and itself, the wild free venison,
asserting its vigor and the dignity of nature.
Not without reason was its slenderness. Such then was its nature.
Lepis, levipis, light foot, methinks. What is a country without rabbits and partridges?
They are among the most simple and indigenous animal products. Ancient and venerable families,
known to antiquity as to modern times, of the very hue and substance of nature,
nearest allied to leaves and to the ground, and to one another. It is either winged or it is legged.
It is hardly as if you had seen a wild creature when a rabbit or a partridge bursts away,
only a natural one, as much to be expected as rustling leaves. The partridge and the rabbit
are still sure to thrive like true natives of the soil, whatever revolutions occur.
If the forest is cut off, the sprouts and bushes which spring up afford them concealment,
and they become more numerous than ever. That must be a poor country indeed, that does not support
a hare. Our woods team with them both, and around every swamp may be seen the partridge
or rabbit walk, beset with twiggy fences and horse-hair snares, which some cowboy tends.